update on how things how these are going
and I must say I've been watching and
looking as I'm walking around social
distancing I think a lot of people seem
to be doing their part and that's great
that Ontarians are stepping up to the
task
even I know some are sort of forget for
a moment and step back and do different
things I'm really encouraged by the way
that others other sectors media are
coming in and giving examples and
encouraging everybody to stay the task
as we're heading towards nearly our
first week through some things and the
days and so it is challenging and it is
disruptive for many and we've seen some
aspects and we'll talk about those in a
moment at the same time there's the the
harsh reality that there are still it is
a serious event we've heard of another
death related to Kovac 19 in the Halton
area and that is unfortunate and sad to
hear and of course our condolences go
out to the family and members there and
and of course with the staff who are
working around there all the protections
steps were taken in that and we're
trying to understand more about that
person's exposure and what had occurred
in that as public health continues their
investigation of that event at this time
so it reminds us that it's not a
theoretical issue these are important
issues to pay attention to and to
continue our social distancing so as you
know I'm going to ask dr. Yaffe to talk
about numbers and cases that because it
gives you a pulse or an idea of how
things are going in Ontario and perhaps
some global things as well if that seems
appropriate so over to you dr. Yaffe
okay thank you
so in Ontario as of this morning we have
a total of a 257 cases of those now
unfortunately two are deceased and five
resolved this is an increase of 43 from
yesterday
and the increase reflects a number of
factors the lab trying to catch up with
the backlog and the fact we have more
people coming back to Ontario we also
have thirty thousand nine hundred and
seventy-two still under investigation
and a total of 12 thousand four hundred
and twenty one negatives so as well we
are continuing to test what we call
Sentinel testing which is people
admitted to hospital with respective ear
respiratory infections outbreaks and
long-term care facilities that with
respiratory infection all those are
samples of those are being tested for
kovat 19 at this point almost 1,700 have
been tested and they are all negative
which is wonderful we do have some still
pending investigation so of those who
are confirmed cases 80 of those where
the investigations been completed 80
percent have traveled outside of Canada
and of those 26% came from some part of
Europe 28% from the United States within
the past 14 days prior to symptom onset
and 15% were a close-contact of a case
and for the others the public health
investigation is continuing so within
the United States the most common states
were New York Colorado California
Florida Nevada and Massachusetts the at
this point Europe has had now more cases
than China with over almost 96 thousand
cases in Europe and over 4300 deaths we
have been working very hard with our
local public health units on
investigating all cases and at this
point we're aware of about 22 cases who
are actually hospitalized keeping in
mind that this number changes
that I think is it for data correct and
we're trying to continue to look at how
to keep our data and the information
flowing forward especially as we're
dealing with as dr. Yaffe alluded to the
number of people returning to Canada
especially from the US we're
anticipating or we over this time
anywhere from two to 500,000 or more in
fact that will be coming back across in
there by various means we've heard some
of the issues at the federal level with
the border and some of the changes there
that we feel coming into fact either
today or tomorrow but we're trying to
get the details of who will be allowed
and essential things back and forth in
that with the agreement between the US
and Canadian governments but that
nevertheless that speaks to the issue
that we've had a lot of people coming
back the lab testing we're trying to get
the backlog we're glad to say that in
that aspect the federal government has
acquired a large volume of test kits and
they are for in those large bomb to us
so that's less of an issue was yesterday
and we're still looking got some more
reagent from them and so we're looking
at more of that to come forward so we
hope with that and with our satellite
labs kicking into gear we'll be able to
move on any backlog and move I guess
fairly expeditiously going forward to
try and deal with that and get those up
because it's important as we're trying
to wrestle with there we have people who
have lab tests done where it would be
nice to know what the result is there's
some where it's very important they know
what the need is and the results are and
there's some where it's critical they
know very quickly what the results are
and we're trying to look at some
priority ranking so that as we go
through this process certain settings
such as patients admitted to hospitals
seen in emergency departments people in
critical conditions for clinical and for
personal protective equipment protocols
they would need to know as quickly as
possible also trying to look at how do
we test health care workers if their
settings where there's someone who is
coming come ill on the floor and that we
need to know that as quickly as possible
there's some
relate to First Nation communities and
remote areas we need to know that as
quickly as possible so we're looking at
a priority list to say we make sure that
they don't get lost in the in the test
pile of you may and they can be
expeditiously moved through because that
doesn't impact our response and so we're
dealing with that so on wider issues
around that we've also put out a memo
from my desk to the healthcare sector on
managing health care workers and illness
and return to work and so that's gone
out because we found there was a variety
of things being asked by different
institutions and employers to staff and
this was a concern to a number of
including our collaboration table with
our labor union members so we put out a
memo to that effect I'm asking that we
would at this time stage of the 14 days
since returning from their travel from
the time of arrival in Ontario that they
would do so and of course that they
developed any illness in that time they
would do the same process as everybody
else in that and we can talk about that
in a moment but also they need to take
that and notify their employer and
occupational health and safety and
public health to be assessed in that
situation and then following that their
return they would have to consult with
public health as well as with
occupational and safety at their
institution to have the all-clear to
return to work at that stage we also
said in there because there was some
concerns that during this time if things
get really critical there may be some
staff positions that an institution says
we really need to have these people may
need to have them back and I said you
can do that ahead of time to designate
which positions in your mind are
essential and with discussion with all
parties that they were mutually agree
that these ones could be essential and
someone say on their 12th or 10th 11th
12th day could return to work assuming
they have been asymptomatic up to them
and with some extra some protection say
on the job and monitoring could do so
but those are ones that we would like to
have those positions determined prior to
that event occurring while we have at
least at the moment a window of
opportunity to do that Maya is busy work
so it has to be done but I think it's
necessary to avoid confusion at that
time so that's gone out we've all
so then send a memo are going to come
out shortly from my desk asking acute
care hospitals to do the same rigorous
screening of visitors as long-term care
facilities and retirement homes we've
asked them to undertake that as well and
so we hope to have that out shortly in
there and so that same as your long-term
care facilities if you've traveled
recently in the last 14 days outside of
Canada or human in contact with a case
in the 14 days within 14 days we ask
that you'll be turned away and not asked
to visit if you're ill of course that's
always been the position you should not
be visiting at that time at the same
time we know there may be some ethnic
ethnic ethical reasons why someone say
with a loved one would like to be
allowed in because there may be time of
death and there's unfortunate
circumstances they would have to
negotiate that with the facility to see
what kind of protection I'd have to wear
time a visit etc so we're not saying
outright that no one under any
circumstances can't but they would have
to assess that situation and the
facility in their own prerogative and
make a determination being sensitive
empathetic to the unique challenges of
that visitor in that circumstance so our
send a note we're trying to review our
wider list of who are essential workers
and who should be in that regard we
haven't been a comprehensive list I know
even that the special Advisory Committee
at the national level had leave the
teleconference early there was a desire
can they compile a national list that
we'd all agree upon and that's all
sectors are working on this one here who
is essential and who should be allowed
to go back to work prior to the 14 days
in there assuming they're asymptomatic
and being monitored with some proper
protection because some people are
basically in a cubicle 6 feet away from
everybody does it really matter if
they're in that position so the unique
circumstances that employers would like
to negotiate with the employee if it
seems essential and critical that person
be on the job so overall I think we're
doing well people are working at it
they're doing creative things I like the
idea that for children and family it's a
family time there's family activities
looking at virtual type things they can
do people actually doing a lot more
exercise walking out
and that on your own of course not in a
large cluster in group and the weather
is improving somewhat and getting warmer
and so that might encourage some more
outdoor in in was social distancing if
you may i watch the behavior in the
stores i was interested in hearing on
the media the i guess i called someone
gave a version of the two-step dance
around with a cashier I thought that was
very interesting and I've seen that
actually occurring to some extent so I
think Ontarians are really embracing
this I think by doing this steadily or
the next number of days ahead of us as
these returnees come back as they go
through their 14-day period and with a
border closing that there will be a
period when that kind of inflow will
have ended to some extent and mostly and
their I time of quarantine will be over
and we'll have to assess things at that
stage so that's why we hope to keep
informing Ontarians how are we doing the
fact that we went back up to forty five
as you remembered Tuesday you said am I
encouraged by only nine and we said I
don't think I'm gonna take that as a
realistic number and the twenty five was
probably more realistic I think forty
five is not surprising to me with a
number of people coming back I wouldn't
be surprised that climbed up higher to
fifty or sixty just because if our
system is as robust as it is with
picking up and people reporting and the
numbers and volumes are dealing with it
would not be surprising to me and in
some one sense be reassuring that our
ongoing monitoring is still working well
in that regard so that's our situation
here we've had some questions I should
mention on our big standing issue
besides the lab testing is PPE and PVE
and all sectors we have people working
full-time full-out on acquiring orders
maintaining historical orders going for
new orders working with our federal
counterparts as they did they came
through they delivered on these swabs
in good time 800,000 kits and how else
come and get some of the other aspects
in there and so we're driving on that
now there's a matter of priority who
should get which PP at which time which
is the most priority setting and we've
talked with many sectors including our
labor groups and saying maybe have to
sit at the table decide what is
priority in that and we have people
health care we have ancillary services
attached to health care and it gets
further and further out and then we got
sometimes people not in health care that
say they want to have it because they
feel they need it and when the data
doesn't really support that how do you
do that and how do you ascertain so if
there's lots around for everybody
anytime I guess you can do what you want
but we're not in that situation so we
have to make sure that those that need
the most protection and get the most
protection so they can do their job and
we don't put them at any hazard because
we are the vibrancy and the the
performance of our healthcare sector is
very critical in these next week's
coming up so those are the main things I
wanted to talk about today and grow up
into questions we assume that a worst
case scenario has been drafted
what is that worst case scenario how
many deaths possibly and how many waves
right and you're going to ask the famous
question on modeling I said you have a
modeling is a really good tool to look
at scenario design and one of the
aspects there is that you have to
analyze what are the assumptions what
are the rates of infections all sorts of
details that goes into it's a
mathematical projection and it's assumed
that there's been an introduction to a
naive area and something's happening
there may be some built-in immunity at
times there may not be we're assuming in
this case because the pandemic there's
no built-in immunity within the
community if you may and that comes in
as a vent and starts to work its way
through and you've heard numbers like 70
to 80 percent of the people will be
infected and they project that and
because they do a turn around and say in
every four to five days it doubles and
you see how it goes almost exponentially
after a while and and so if you do that
you take the numbers in Ontario thirteen
million you put six to 80% you can do
your own quick math in your head it's
not unusual they would say well very
quickly within a period of of your first
case if you already have community-wide
spread throughout the community that's
already occurring that you have not been
aware of within a period of three to
four weeks
you would already be at 10 to 20,000
cases and of those 10 to 20,000 there's
about 20% that would be hospitalized and
within those of the whole population
there be mortality rate right now is
varied it's used around 2 to 3% Italy
it's much higher unfortunately and you'd
say well then there's a lot of be
hospitalizations and deaths I should say
those the deaths so you should see that
so one of your tests of what's at is
that if that's the case then we should
see evidence of not just 45 a day we
should see three to four to five to
seven hundred every day rolling up we
should be rapidly moving up to ten to
twenty thousand in some cases where
we've had before when we start at the
end of January we should have seen that
by mid-february we should see the
hospitals already been loaded needy
apartments we should see not just 22
people we should see a lot more and we
should have not just two desks
unfortunately have two already
we should see a lot more so one of the
aspects the model says ok where you add
you take the theoretical and put it into
the real data and say is there a match
or not if it isn't why isn't it and
that's the question we only ask to say
because that tells you is what you're
doing is that working or not working and
most of time you want to talk about one
in one event but the way we are Canada
and Toronto especially in the tree GTA
in this global reality we don't have
just one community here we have multiple
and so we went through and because our
issue with the choice with China Wuhan
and who by province is that we had 5,000
people a day going back and forth all
through December all through January all
through March and February March dropped
down I'm wrong we should have seen
because it already was we had our first
case in January but they're already
ramping up big time
in China in December very big time in
November and so why didn't we see and
then that calmed down and then we had
the whole event with Iran and Italy and
even the people didn't know exactly when
it started in the country didn't
announce the 19th although people said
it was already happening a week before
that we had people going back and forth
we have one of the largest communities
here outs
the country a significant movement and
the people weren't advised they didn't
know so we should have seen it again now
we have another challenge and so we're
not fortunate to have only one event
that's going to impact us we're moving
through each event and our public health
units with our containment thing have
done a an immense amount of fantastic
work tracking all these people down
contacting phoning voting contacts and
it's just a huge amount of work and
especially some of the larger the nation
like Toronto and around the GTA have had
the majority of the work to do and
that's no end to the amount of work
force involvement and hours and hours of
calling and correcting I think that's
kept us intact for the first two can we
continue and that's where a challenge
that's why we said we can't just depend
on that alone we have to have the social
distancing we have to tear the plate
emergency we have to close the schools
and that because that kind of number
coming back I myself I can say that
public health alone can hold that line
on that totally we just don't have that
kind of work force in there but if we
put these checks and bells in place if
we ask people and people adhere to
isolation
if people hear to social distancing that
14-day period and still assessing cases
and there will be some more sick
patients and there will be
hospitalizations hopefully not many
deaths we'll have to see how we do and
as I said we had over two weeks now we
have another two weeks we're not food
are by my second two weeks I said last a
week ago we're coming to their I said
hyper caution added a very caution and
now we're going to see because everybody
locked down basically school is closed
twelve into the thirteenth people didn't
go on March breaks some still did people
started returning writ large on the
weekend into early Monday Tuesday we're
trying to get some data from CBS a
border security how many are coming back
what's the flow on that how is it
happening so we're in that critical time
right now and those people having if
they've been exposed because assume
they're coming back asymptomatic
because they won't be able to come back
assuming that they come back knowing
this appear time when they incubate
average it's usually sometime around
seven to nine days after the last
exposure if they are incubated at all
and so if you took that you do the math
you're looking at okay how might when
would this Mike likely peak we said the
scene seen the same thing at Trenton the
people off the Diamond Princess and one
was symptomatic on flight and now we
have the 10 and a la them occurred after
about 6 or 7 days 8 days in the
quarantine process so it seems to be
consistent especially with that average
demographic age group and so that gives
you an idea if the numbers we're talking
about how we're going to monitor it so a
worst case scenario always is that if it
goes you haven't been able to contain it
your social distancing hasn't been able
to limit it and it goes widespread and
those numbers start to ramp up and I
mean the worst can a the worst case
we're hearing right now unfortunately
and the challenge are huge in northern
Italy I I mean it's just amazing how
they're gonna do it I don't know it's
just overwhelming and so we don't want
that situation I don't think we will but
one should not be too overconfident but
I am confident in our system I'm
confident our containment processes I'm
confident the Ontarians response and I'm
confident that people coming back will
be responsible and will do what they're
supposed to do just for their period of
time 14 days so ache we can pull it I
think Ontario we can do it again how was
premier Jason Kenney able to give a
projection
today that Alberta is gonna peek in four
to five weeks I haven't seen their money
I seen the numbers they're the course
their number cases is a lot lower than
ours well they just started with their
cases just about the first case was a
week and a half ago one or two and so
they're just starting to ramp up now
so there's situations very different
than ours their movement of people is
very different than ours
their demographics are different than
ours their global situation with the
international airports is quite
different than ours so and the number of
border crossings and the flow is quite
different so I don't purport to know
what one I haven't really asked their
sandwich I haven't asked her how she did
the calculation or what mom used what
we've been told by our modelers the
saying that once your introduction as I
walked you through on the premise that's
community wide you'll see a peak they
always say by the repetitive time in
about three to four weeks it's not and
we should have seen it in February we
should have seen it in March and you do
three to four weeks from when this whole
thing started with the that aspect there
that started about a week two weeks ago
so we should be seeing something and the
fact we got 45 today that still seems to
me surprisingly low with the flow we've
got coming but I will be not surprised
that goes up I don't want to go up huge
so we'll have to watch there's a long
answer but
speaking of modeling there's a draft
ongoing study by researchers at U of T u
Asia and Sunnybrook that has said that
Ontario will reach its capacity of ICU
beds in sixteen to thirty seven days
depending on
this Fred great have you seen that and
is it reliable I haven't seen that study
per se but if you base it on the
modeling and the cases and what I've
told you with those ten twenty thirty
thousand number that would not be
unsurprising that's what we're looking
quickly how do you deal with it because
it's droplet spread so an isolation room
can be any room that's used for
isolation it's more important what
you're doing in the room and that means
we're ordering more ventilators or
trying to acquire quickly even more
ventilators that seems to be if you in
Italy situation the limiting factor so
some people isolation room are just
watched and monitored with nasal oxygen
just till in isolation you're gonna have
if everybody has covin 19:00 you can put
more than one person room if you want I
don't recommend it but you have to do
what you have to do and we're looking at
different if he had more facilities
where would we get them from and you
heard the minister said she's looking
into that and we're looking into that so
we're not going to say we're just gonna
hope we get it would do it we're gonna
plan for it in case we have to keep in
mind it's very helpful to have these
modeling papers and discussions there
based on assumptions and the assumptions
are the best they can be at the time
that things change and they help us to
plan for services and so that is why you
know we're asking to cut back on
elective procedures there at ordering
more ventilators and so on
but at the end of the day they are
modeling and they may or may not reflect
what happens often that is one of the
assumptions
existence or the extent of community
spread right now and how you've spoken
at this length but how do you know the
extent of it how do you not know
especially considering that the testing
gap the inability to do so many tests um
so I mean we talk about community cases
that means you find one that public
health to the best their ability of
asking and interviewing can find any
connection to travel or to a known case
contact now we know by infectious these
things it just doesn't happen
spontaneously
you know they got it from someone to
some says they might have got it from
someone we don't know in the community
ideally what you do as we do and infects
these aspects all the time we find out
that person circle then you find out
there's four or five other people center
Matic then you find attached to those
there's another twenty there's another
thirty you can see that there's waves of
infection that are already out there and
after I said I don't know how far it's
gone it's gone in our community wide now
it may be CUNY might in pick a community
but not in northern Terrell because it's
it doesn't go it spreads by ways and
contact it is droplet contact in that
aspect so it has that and then every
four to six days it doubles if you have
find out that you've missed it and it's
gone and gone gone if that's happening
you would have to assume if it's gone
out and that one has a background and
say two or three hundred cases some of
those should be going Det departments
some of those should be seen someone
should be picked up in our Sentinel
surveillance because they came in with
respiratory problems and even if they
say we're looking for it we say we found
it and so that's why we're doing the
sandal surveillance also is it totally
hundred percent proof no I mean doesn't
mean happen so my challenge always in
that one there is that I want to see
evidence of community widespread much
like we've done with other infectious
disease outbreaks where we know we try
to do a cluster local either in a
facility local as in a group or in
employment site and you do that
investigation but you sometimes find
it's just gone out and as you check more
it's more and more and now it's gone
community-wide I would like that
demonstrated before I say it's gone
be wide now that means a lot of work but
it's something you have to do and you
always have to be going looking for so I
would call local spread so we have a
case and assume there's if the person
can't recall and it's pretty hard to
remember what you did in the last 14
days you might have met someone that you
didn't know and sometimes later I said
you know that person was a covert 19
case I didn't know no one told me
Michael probably didn't know anybody and
they didn't but that can happen and they
may not recall that moment but they'll
call back later just like we had one
from my round went back for a while and
said someone called me up said you're
you're in contact with the case the
person didn't know Susie knew they
wouldn't got seen and so how does one do
that so we have local clustering and
then you have community wide and that
may be that community but not the next
one and so can you contain it with an
accurate e much like Chinese with Luhan
and then they span up to who black
province right so it was that a
successful endeavor would seem to be so
far from their data from their other
cities that the cases they had in larger
other large centers were all travel
people from Wuhan so their process
seemed to have been successful they had
community wide in Wuhan that's a lot of
people but it wasn't not community wide
throughout all of China if you see it's
just there I'm just wondering how can
you be sure that something hasn't been
missed and is lurking I'm speaking of
this because of a tweet or sorry a note
put out by ottawa's medical officer of
Health yesterday sriracha's testing
isn't able to track down each case in
our community because the mild illness
the majority of people experience is not
distinguishable from common colds and we
cannot test large numbers so I'm asking
that because you've already said that
going back to the case the original
cases and the
the spreading models or the projections
it should happen in February maybe it
should be happening in the March we
haven't had any of that yet so are we
just really lucky or as maybe something
lurking you know I would say that I mean
I agree with what dr. etches said that
you know as we know 80% of cases are
mild in fact some people might even not
realize they have anything and we have
been telling people you don't need to go
to the doctor if you're not feeling
really sick you don't necessarily need
to get tested and as dr. Williams said
we are trying to prioritize the tests to
healthcare workers people long-term care
facilities and so on so what we're
trying to focus in on is the most ill
and the people who could give it to the
most vulnerable but you know I don't I
think we are you know I wouldn't say
we're lucky I say that what we're doing
is focusing the efforts on the most
important people in most important cases
and we're very pleased with the
excellent compliance of the public with
social distancing we're just talking
about being the fourth largest city in
North America and if you go out it's
almost like a ghost town and so I think
people are really acting very
responsibly and we're working together
as as a community to do everything that
we can to control this infection follow
heard of some people they're leaving
their shoes at the front door like
outside because they've heard the virus
can come into the house on shoes or
whenever they get home from where
they've been they take off their outside
clothes and put on there inside clothes
is that going too far or is that a good
idea surfaces it doesn't stay that long
you've heard other consultants say
generally it's about one to two hours
and the chance that you step on
something and then walk for another two
or three hours is it still gonna be
there not likely I think it's I guess my
mother I take my shoes off anyways I go
in the house that's that's
this proper etiquette in our family I
guess but that's another whole issue I
think the clothes that means you've been
leaning in brushing against all sorts of
stuff I don't recommend you do that that
you you know and different things
now you may should have an overcoat and
you may want to take care of that but
the chance of carrying it on and being
if you're taking it to one or two our
community pack is it still gonna be
unlikely in there but there's a lot of
variables that can play in there
temperature humidity what was the source
of it cetera so is it precautionary it's
fur gosh it may be extensive but people
I think feel they want to do what they
feel is necessary the same as some
people want to wear still wear masks
around the city even though they're not
anywhere near six feet of anybody
they're using very determined hand
hygiene so they're talking they're
losing layer upon layer of protection
because that's what they feel they want
to do and I don't really okay that's
what they need to do I'm more interested
in the social distancing and staying at
home those aspects there so I think
let's keep at it and we're doing well as
Barbara said dr. Yaffe said and I I
think that's excellent and but you have
to stay the course now we're only in day
for some it's only day four and five
cents for Monday cents emergency but
some are instance last week with the
children at home
so it's it's not we have to focus our
minds on being consistent and keeping at
it and planning ahead what are things
you're going to do activities and things
to keep all that connecting
electronically and do almost kind of
socialize so people are distancing but
more connected it seems in some ways and
that's it's good to see in that way and
that's why the Vantage of we have now we
didn't have before and there are lots of
median ways to do that without having to
be right with the person that's about
the death in whole
that was announced today I know you
think careful not to see there is
community spread but they've said that
this man had no contact with anyone who
had coca 19 and no travel history so is
this a case of community spread out in
Halton I've had several conversations
with the medical officer of health from
Halton today about the case and what I
learned from her was that it's so far
they have not identified a connection
with travel or a case but they were
still doing the investigation your first
question on the phone comes from Alison
Martell Reuters please go ahead thank
you so I know that you're working on
resupplying protective equipment can you
tell me it has the province distributed
any personal protective equipment to
hospitals or other providers so far I
think I heard it we're continually to
continue to complete orders of
historical past
something's been normally what they
normally order those who have been
understood are still being delivered but
with the amount of concerns in that
they're going through some of that
quicker and so we're looking at how to
ramp up that delivery through them but
regular deliveries we understand have
been occurring in the large institutions
there's some smaller ones that probably
their orders do not come forward on a
regular basis because they're not using
it on a frequent one and they've already
run out sometimes and they're making
requests to us on a regular basis many
to say we need some were out of it we
want some and we're trying to as best we
can address those needs of thing then I
miss your asset as we've been able to
place any extraordinary orders we've
placed a number of orders have they been
delivered some have some haven't
it varies because those companies are in
a large global situation and we're
course we've been in communication with
a national procurement on behalf of the
federal government that would do it on
be on in regards to all the province and
territories and they're doing their part
as well so everybody's doing and look
for where they can get it from and we
have been successful in some levels but
not as much as we'd like to be and we're
still driving at it your next question
comes from McIntosh with national
observer please go ahead hi we've heard
from the parents of the medically
fragile teenagers we need 24-hour care
and they told us that public health
Ontario has not recommended that nurses
and personal support workers in his case
use masks gloves and gowns I'm just
wondering what the current guidance is
on this and if it's different for home
care versus like a group care setting
like a hospital if it's the one that I
was aware of there's a mother of a child
with some serious medical issues and
certainly I sympathize with their
concerns my understanding is that the
worker would be wearing appropriate
personal protective equipment the child
does not need to wear any and the
concern that I had heard was that she
wanted the child to work and PP was so
we're saying that this the worker should
be wearing PPE and if they're if they
aren't the mother should be contacting
the the agency if there are shortages in
this area and these workers aren't able
to get protection which you consider
bringing expired protection back into
rotation I think that had to deal with
some areas have run out and their
equipment is expired would that be the
correct context thank you we have we
have looked into that matter the issue
being well some people feel
theoretically it's it's okay
well the manufacturers have not come
forward and agreed with that and neither
has the licensure in Health Canada
agreed to that so while you could try
that the risk is that if they did become
infected with with Cova 19 whether it's
from that from you at the time they're
wearing or not there would be an issue
to say well you were using expired
equipment that the provider the
manufacturer did not agree that you
should be using
your next question comes from Shawn
Jeffords with the Canadian Press please
go ahead
dr. Yaffe I'm wondering if you can
elaborate a little bit more on the 22
people who you mentioned were
hospitalized with Koba 19 in the
province I I guess I'm wondering it is
this is if that number takes into
account all the cases from the start of
tracking on this or is this a current
figure now and what does that mean
overall in terms of how the hospital
system is handling that illness this is
information that I have received I've
asked the health units to notify me on a
daily basis about any hospitalized cases
any other unusual circumstances and a
four of course any unfortunate deaths so
as of today my understanding is there
are 22 cases in hospital now again
there's a proviso that they may not be
aware of all of them and they may be
discharged as we speak or they may be
new ones so it's a moving target as far
as we know the hospital capacity issues
are not significant they have been
working on reducing elective surgery and
opening up more beds so I don't think
this is this has caused any undue
pressure on the system at this point but
certainly the system is preparing for
that in one on community transmission I
know that you mentioned that this this
individual who fortunately passed away
today you're it's too early I guess to
say whether this is a case of community
transmission or not give any sense of
how long it actually will take to track
this back well it's as you know a case
in Halton and the Health Unit has to do
the investigation interview the
patient's family obviously the patient
cannot be interviewed at this point to
find out where he had been in the last
14 days before he became ill and that
might not be that easy to find
he was admitted a few days before he
passed away and you know where did he
was he working
did he socialize like what was he doing
so it's hard to say you know probably
it'll take a few days and they may or
may not be able to determine where he
got it your final question on the phone
comes from Jenny yen with the Toronto
Sun please go ahead hi there the
ministry has set o guidelines for
weddings and funerals that are exempt
from having a maximum of 50 people is
not responsible
is it not irresponsible to have that
exception exemption given the people are
urged to do social distancing for
example not even having a friend over to
a house I last my understand is that we
said we were still they're still called
gatherings and they had that limit of
the 50 on there there may be ways that
you could arrange might seem more with
the funeral you could have it in
sections with visitation and things that
you could end up having more than 50
over the whole event so there might be
ways you can structure things that way
that would be within the the
sensitivities of the of the ceremony and
yet honoring that situation so we were
still holding to that would be the rule
I hadn't heard any definite exemptions
we have an admin task to look at that
in particular we were more asked to say
would that meet that category I guess
one could I guess one could imagine a
large outdoor one not in this weather
maybe wedding where people are spread
all over a large field and stuff I'm I
guess there could be something but I
think that's more people gathered
together and honoring that with the two
the two meter distance throughout the
whole thing in the bride and groom I
guess that's there's challenges in there
but I think they can honor that because
they're going to be close contacts
anyway so here um make it feel question
a growth rate of new cases so I've been
tracking it over the last eight days in
the last four days it seems like in the
last four days you're looking at about a
15% daily increase in the number of
cases some researches have just put out
a researchers at U HN and Sunnybrook and
U of T have put out a scenario about
hospital capacity with us with a growth
rate of seven and a half percent per day
do you have a target of what the social
distancing measures could do to the
growth rate because U is it conceivable
that you can get below a seven and a
half percent per day growth rate well
I'd like to think we can I mean as we
you're in the room but we had talked at
length about modeling and arithmetic and
working that and how already we've had
two major impacts into our area here
where we should have already been way
over and we didn't and I think that was
the containment activities of the public
health units now we have of containment
activities continuing but we've had in
social distancing and we've added in
emergency measures to do that to assist
why because this time the amount coming
back is quite huge potentially from back
from the US and we don't know the full
extent of the spread of the infection in
the United States it's evolving fairly
quickly
and so while we might have thought that
where most of our people coming from the
eastern seaboard would be exempt and may
not be the case we have to assume that
aspect do I think that by people giving
their own information and that was I was
pleased to hear that someone came across
the border last night received was asked
questions was given a pamphlet was told
what to do and was given a fact sheet we
didn't see that a week ago and that is
more a sort of action put out by the
federal government with their CBSA
guards at the border crossings is
reassuring and people are listening to
that
we're trying to ramp up our other
methods with our self-assessment tool
and different ones like that to try and
engage the concern public as much as
possible in every way so that they know
and will be informed what they should do
but also has some of their questions
concerns answered and that's why we're
trying to ramp up Patel house all those
things that we say to put in place it's
not just social distancing it's not only
aggressively following the cases and
their contacts that we talked about but
it's also keeping the public informed
and with communication and answer their
specific questions about their specific
circumstances that they're unsure what
to do they would get advised of what
they should do and so that they would
come forward in a timely way or take the
proper steps to continue isolating
continued social distancing until such
time because it is droplets Fred it is
containable if everybody does what
they're supposed to do and that's the
therein lies the challenge what do you
have a target for what you think the
growth rate could be reduced to what is
that target if social distancing
measures are kept in place for the
coming weeks well we have been saying
and now with the extra swabs coming from
the federal government we hope for our
reagents and our labs continually
expanding and we said week two weeks ago
that in two to three weeks we hope to
expand and go up to a capacity of 5,000
tests a day of course rating new cases
sorry well part of that is the testing
and so how do you document those if your
is the growth rate of cases goes up
considerably and there's still a home
isolating and they're not getting ill
and they're doing what they need to do
and limits the impact on the EDS and
impacts on the hospitals that would be
successful as I said right from the
get-go
our target is first try and keep
mortality down look at your voting
population second keep your made
morbidity down why you don't want
overwhelm your health care system right
and so if you can keep mortality and
morbidity down even if you have a number
of cases if they do all they're supposed
to
and stay home and do things like that
the law in cases doctor yeah Freddie
said when you're out of the room are
going to be fairly mild in that eighty
percent
it's the vulnerable population were
worried about and part of our aspect is
to deal with that and so if you get a
lot of people under that will come back
and have mild symptoms and report in and
stay at home and do the things are
supposed to do and then after 14 days
are cleared and it's a large number of
those would that be a failure in the
system I think that shows the success of
containment through social distancing